[MUSIC]
In this video, we're going to look at how
we can show trends overtime using
line charts and trendlines.
Well, you have change overtime and
you want to represent that graphically,
a line chart can often
be a very good choice.
And you can see Rohan has already
created a line chart tracking CO2
concentrations from 800,000
years ago to the present.
What he would like to do next is zoom in
on the most recent data from 1960 onwards,
and again he'd like to use a line chart.
What he'd also like to do then
is to get a projection for
what our concentrations will
look like in 10 years time.
So we're going to start by coming
to our data which is in the CO2
concentration tab.
And we have the summarized version
in the second group over here.
And we're going to select
our concentrations.
Remember, we can't include
our years to begin with,
we'll add those later as labels.
So click into G3 we're
going to press control,
shift down arrow,
scroll up a bit, come to insert.
Come to line charts and
we're going to choose a 2D line chart.
Now we'd like this line chart
to be exactly the same size as
the one in the other sheet.
So we're going to click
on our format tab and
on the far right we have the options
to actually enter our height and width.
So we're going to make this 14 by 24.
And then if you like, you can just
move the chart up a little bit.
And we'd like to actually add
some styling to this chart, and
this is best done early.
So come to our chart design and
if you hover over your designs we will see
some nice ones to choose from, but
the one we want in this case is style 4.
This adds drop lines and
removes your grid lines.
The first fix we're going to have to
make is to correct our horizontal axis,
and this is much like we did
in our first topic this week.
We're going to come to select data.
We're going to click edit
under axis labels and
then we're going to come to F4 and
press control shift down arrow.
You'll notice I've actually taken
the years all the way up to 2028, and
that's because when we add our trendline,
we want those labels.
And you haven't put them up front,
you'll have to go and repeat this step.
So we're just going to save
ourselves a little bit of time.
And we're going to say, OK and OK.
You'll see at the moment it's only going
up to 2018 because our data goes up to
that, but when we add our trendline, it
will automatically add those other labels.
Great, now another fix we
need to make is our heading.
You can see although
this say CO2 correctly,
that subscript has not come
through in our heading here.
So we will have to manually fix that.
So click into our chat title, highlight
the two and then we're going to come
to our home tab, come to the font
group and click the little drop down.
Mac users, you'll need to go to your menu.
And we're going to choose subscripts and
OK, and that looks a lot better.
Now, because our data starts all the way
up over 300, our curve looks very flat and
we already have the context from the first
chart, so we're going to adjust the axis.
So I'm going to double click on
the axis to open up my panel, and
then I'm going to come to axis options and
I'm going to start it at 300.
You need to be a little careful
with doing such a thing.
In this case it's fine, but
it can be misleading in other cases.
Because we have our previous chart,
our data is no longer misleading.
And now we would like to
add a data label up here so
we can see where our
missions got to in 2018.
The problem is, if I just come in and
turn on data labels, there are so
many that it gets messy.
So I'm going to turn those off.
And what we're going to do is make sure
you've clicked on your green line.
And then we're going to click on one
of the data points that's visible.
And then just come to the end of the green
line and select a single data point.
And with just the one data point selected,
if you turn your data labels on,
you just get the one.
So that looks great.
Now let's add our trendline.
If you come to chart elements,
you'll see trendline down here.
And clicking on the black arrow, it will
give you a few options, but generally you
need to come into more options when
you're working with trendlines.
And then once you're in trendlines,
click on the trendline options.
There are six trendlines
you can choose from and
these account in a bit more
detail in your toolbox.
By default, Excel will always select
linear, that means a constant trend.
We can see that's not what we've got here,
so let's click on exponential.
And it looks quite a lot better,
but how do we know if it's better?
There's an option to turn
on an R-squared value.
And R-squared value is a ratio.
The higher the number and
the closer it is to one,
the more closely the trendline
resembles your existing curve.
And just clicking back on my trendline,
you can see with the linear it was
0.98 but with the exponential
it's definitely a lot better.
It's quite possible though,
that if you've got a dip in your curve or
in this case where it seems
steeper than exponential,
that you still not getting as
close a match as you'd like.
So one option is then to try polynomial.
These can be all the way from order
two through to an order six in Excel.
And you can see for
this data with the polynomial order two,
we've almost got an exact match.
So we're going to turn
off our R-squared and
now we're going to get a projection
forward for 10 periods.
So where it says forward,
were going to type in a 10.
And because our periods are in years, it
has put a projection all the way to 2028.
Now, unfortunately, there's no
option to add labels on trendlines,
but there is quite
a neat work around this.
So we're going to come back
to our trendline options and
we're going to display the equation.
This is the equation that has been
used to generate this trendline.
What it's done, it's taken each data
point and remember these are just
the numbers from 1 through to 69 and
applied this equation to it.
So to get our point here,
all we need to do is substitute the X
in this equation for the number 69.
I'm going to click in and
select that equation.
Control C to copy,
come to a blank cell and paste.
And now what I need to do
is edit that equation.
So I'm just going to double click and
we're going to get rid of the Y.
So we start with an equal sign.
And then we're going to replace the X
squared with the times by 69 to
the power shift 6 and 2, so that little
character gives us to the power 2.
And then I'm going to replace
this X by just times 69.
And then I'm going to press Enter.
And that is the value of
the data point in 2028.
Now, if you'd like to
decrease your decimal,
you can do that on your number formatting.
And then to get that into the chart,
we're going to click on our chat,
insert, shapes.
We're going to grab a text box.
Pop our text box in there.
And then come into our formula bar, type
equals, click on our cell and press Enter.
And then just resize your text box so
that it sits nicely.
And if you click back on your trendline,
we can turn off your equation.
One last thing,
let's fix our horizontal axis.
So click on your horizontal axis.
Come to positioning and change your
text direction to rotate 270 degrees.
That's looking great, so
we can now copy this chart.
Click on the edge, control C,
come to your line and area charts.
Click in P3 and paste.
So we've just seen how we
can use line charts and
trendlines to visualize
trends in our data.